From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselminutes a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
two 33 recorded live Thursday,
September 16th, 2010. Support for Hanselman it's
is provided by Tellerik rad
controls, the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com.
In this episode, Scott talks
with Richard Pawson about naked
objects. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes today.
We're chatting with Richard Pawson
about naked objects. How are
you, sir? I'm good. Thanks
for having me on the
show, Scott. Yeah, thank you.
I appreciate the time zone
and all the trouble as
you are on the other
side of the pond. So
naked objects, this is a
very provocative name. What, what
is that? And should I
be worried? Well, occasionally it
does cause some problems with
emails and filters and the
like, but no, it's a,
it's a sound idea. The
underlying philosophy is really just
that when you develop an
application, the only thing you
should have to develop our
domain objects, the naked domain
objects, and you should get
everything else for free. The,
the persistence layer should be
for free. The user interface
should be for free or
at least the default user
interface. That's the philosophy That
in itself is rather provocative.
The, the idea that the
domain object is so, is
so important or so rich,
that it would have enough
information to generate a user
interface is surprising to me.
Does this work for any
kind of user interface or
only the most basic user
interface? Well, yes. I mean
it, to contrast this with
say, you know, there are
loads of frameworks out there
that will take domain objects
and represent them as in
a simple data interface with
crud methods, for updating them
and creating and so forth.
But what we do is
reflect all of the behavior
of a domain object. All
of its public methods become
actions that the user can
perform, or by default, they
become actions. The user can
perform on the user interface
unusually in the software industry.
I don't believe that this
is the solution to all
known problems, but it is
very, very good for a
whole class of applications that
have quite complex domain models.
What you might traditionally call
data intensive applications. It's not
suitable for extremely rich multimedia
Steinem applications. It's for, you
know, structured data style of
applications. But it's good for
that. All right, well let's
so let's do this. Let's
back up and start the
beginning. How did you develop
this? Well, naked objects is
an idea goes back more
than 10 years. It was
actually my, my PhD thesis
and its origin was trying
to understand why the power
of object orientation, which I
was introduced to in the,
in the late eighties, didn't
really take off in mainstream
commercial systems development. And one
of my conclusions was that
it was by the time
you developed all the layers
above and below your domain
objects, you lost all the
advantages of doing a good
job of domain modeling in
the middle. And there was
a lot of work going
on even then on how
to create a persistence layer
automatically from a domain model.
And that's now modern ORMs
and entity framework in the,
in the.net world. But there
wasn't much going on on
what you could do above
the domain model. And I
had this just idea really
that, that if you did
your domain model properly, if
you made your objects rich
enough, it ought to be
possible to create an object
oriented user interface from that
automatically. Now the first ones
we did were very much
a rich style of client
server user interface, and it
worked very well, but you
couldn't, you couldn't modify the
user interface. You had to
stick with the generic one
that that naked objects gave
you much more recently. In
fact, very recently, we've, we've
now created a new version
of naked objects called naked
objects, MVC that works with
asp.net MVC. And that gives
you a complete MVC application
for free having written your
domain objects. And you can
then go on and customize
the UI to your heart's
content much as you could
for any asp.net MVC application.
Although the more you customize
it, the more you'll lose
the advantages of it being
naked objects. So the concept
isn't specific to MVC, I
could do this particularly, I
mean really in any, in
any world, right? I can
do this in WinForms or
Absolutely. In fact, the biggest
systems we've built have been
with WPF user interface that
was non customizable. It was,
it was just a direct
reflection of the domain model.
And I should say that
naked objects is actually a
pattern. It's an architectural pattern.
And the framework that my
company develops is only one
of several frameworks that do
implement this pattern now. So
I'm using the word naked
objects in two senses there.
Did you do his naked
objects and a name that
you came up with because
you said that there were
other companies, was your, is
your thesis and a company
that you run and then
others have taken that, that
thesis like rest. Yes, absolutely
naked Altrix is the name
I came up with. It
was the name of my
thesis, surprisingly enough, in an
academic environment. And people often
ask me where, where the
idea came from, and there's
an official story and a
true story. The official story
is that it comes from
that wonderful quote from Anton
to sad. Exupery where he
said the design is completed.
Not when there is anything
more to add, but when
there is nothing more to
take away, the true story
is that there's a, there's
a TV chef in the
UK. I think he's known
in the U S Jamie
Oliver, who's called the naked
chef. And I was watching
his program one night, about
10 years ago. And he
was talking about, you know,
the essence of good cooking
is just having good ingredients
and those ingredients should show
through in the end dish.
And I thought, well, that's
what I'm talking about. You
know, the essence of good
systems development is just having
a good domain model and
that domain model should show
right through and be the
user experience as well. That's
quite a contrast between the,
the, the apocryphal story and
the actual story. Well, that's
often the way isn't it.
Okay. So the advantage of
this is that you, you
can get a lot of,
a lot of code quickly.
You can get a lot
of you can rapidly prototype
presumably Yes, there there's some
videos on our website and
you can, you can see
me do a, a complete
system very, very quickly. And
it's very tempting to focus
on that the, the rapid
application development aspect, but I
think that's actually secondary. I
think it's a kind of
byproduct, almost the fact that
you can do extraordinarily quick
prototyping that wasn't our real
focus. The real focus was
that if, if you do
it this way, what you
end up with is a
much cleaner, more agile, more
maintainable system, partly because you've
got much less code, but
also because it forces you
to do a good job
of the, the object model
itself. I like to say
that naked objects make some
good modeling, easier and bad
modeling, obvious, because if you're
exposing your object model to
the users, you've got to
get it right. Okay. When
applied to asp.net MVC, though,
you don't necessarily have to
write any views or controllers
because there's enough richness in
your, in your naked naked
object model, that, that you
have a controller of your
own. That's actually doing the
underlying work, right? That's absolutely
correct. You don't need to
write a single view or
controller. You just write the
domain objects and run it
with our generic controller as
it's called and about half
a dozen generic views that
we have. And I should
stress this isn't cogeneration. We're
not generating scaffolding pages for
the domain model. It's all
done using reflection. And at
run time, the framework is
reflecting on the properties and
methods of a domain object,
and then rendering that through
this generic controller and, and
views to give you a
basic user interface. And actually
that user interface is perfectly
good enough for a lot
internal use applications. It's, it's
not at all suitable for
a public facing application where
you do need a much
higher degree of design and,
and a more scripted style
of interaction. So thinking about
this in the context of
the, of the listener, who
is probably familiar with asp.net
dynamic data, and has probably
seen demos where someone would
make a product model and
a categories model, and then
a UI pops out the
other side, and then they
are told that it's not
cogeneration. Then I would immediately
in trying to apply this
to what I already know.
I would say this sounds
like asp.net dynamic data. Yeah.
So there are two quite
distinct differences. I mean, certainly
superficially in the first five
minutes of the demo, you'd
think yes, there was, it
was a similarity. I think
the big differences is we
don't end up with scaffold
pages, but the bigger one
is that whereas dynamic data
is about exposing crowd methods,
create, read, update, and delete.
I don't think there's any
other framework that takes the
view of exposing the behavior
of the objects, the, the
public methods as actions. And
I think the whole idea
of naked objects, there were
two kinds of our hearts
in it. The first was
why don't we expose the
behavior as well. And the
second almost biggest surprise was
that if you did that,
there was no need to
have any kind of master
script on top that actually
you just expose the objects
and services to the user.
And that would be enough.
Okay. So these models, what
do these look like? Are
they simply, they're simply more
intelligent or are they, are
they annotated, you know, they
filled with, with, with attic,
with dotnet attributes and metadata,
that gives you extra information
about them. Yes. There, there,
there are two things that
you do there. First of
all, let's be clear. They
are pocos that you're not
to inherit any class in
our framework or implement any
interface. There are two things
that you do do one,
as you said, is you
add attributes. And when we
started this a few years
ago, that was not a
very popular idea. And we
had to define lots of
our own attributes gradually as
Microsoft has kind of got
this way of thinking and
using it quite a lot
as the, the attributes have
appeared in what is it,
system dot component, model.data annotations,
we've obsoleted hours in favor
of the standard system ones.
So, and, and that applies
both to specifying things like
string lengths and whether a
property is mandatory or not.
And, and if you want
to rename it, if you
don't want to use the
default, you can use display
name and so forth. And
then the second thing we
have, which is more unusual
is, is programming by. So
if you have, if you
have an action, let's say,
you know, create new order.
You can write a bunch
of methods called for example,
validate, create new order or
hide, create new order or
disable create new order. And
those are recognized by convention
and picked up at runtime
and use to control your
access to that method. So
validate will validate the parameters
on the action and disable
will make it unavailable based
on the state of the
object, for example. So those
are the two things you're
doing, adding attributes and using
conventions Simply by their existence,
Simply by their existence. You
don't need to hook them
up in any way. There's
no, there's no configuration involved.
Interesting. So it's all convention
based on naming Very much
so. And, and this is
why it's a very, very
nice match. It's almost the
flip side of entity framework
code first, which I'm a
big fan of. And I
know you did a show
about that recently. So, you
know, I like to say
that that entity framework code
first, and it's in its
most recent incarnation, the whole
ethos there is you should
write pocos and you should
get the persistence layer for
free without having to think
about it. And, and that,
that follows conventions first attributes,
second configuration third. And that's
the same philosophy that we
have using the same. Pocos
creating the user interface, following
conventions attributes, and only as
a last resort, any kind
of configuration. This is the
part of the show where
I mock you while actually
Tellerik mock says your applications
that you're testing dependent on
external systems over which you
have no control. Maybe you're
being slowed down by those
systems, that lack of availability,
responsiveness, do you want to
do TDD, right? Our friends
at Tellerik help you solve
some of those problems with
their newest mocking tool, just
mock it'll let you do
fast, simple controlled unit tests,
independent of external resources like
databases, web services, proprietary code,
unlike some mocking tools, just
mock works with non-virtual methods,
seal classes, static methods, giving
you a complete control of
your code. You can get
more details. You can download
just mock at telerik.com/just Mark.
And don't forget to thank
Tellerik for supporting Hanselman it's
on their Facebook fan page,
facebook.com/tellerik. Thanks a lot. We're
kind of going back in
my own personal software development
timeline. This seems more like
the rich C plus plus
objects that I wrote 20
years ago. It seems like
lately the quote unquote objects
that I've been writing have
been basically just strucks. I
mean, I say public class
foo, but ultimately it's a
pretty stupid object. I've been
passing around effectively data transfer
objects. And you're basically saying
that we should have a
lot richer functionality in our,
in our objects, certainly more
than the average dotnet programmers
use to, to having. Yeah,
that's absolutely right. And it's
interesting that you, you made
the comment there that like
you used to write a
lot of people who, when
they encounter naked objects, I,
I get emails like this
all the time where people
say, you know, it's not
so much that this is
new. It's just that this
feels like what I, what
was in my head 20
years ago when I first
learned small talk, a very
common statement, I get it
is going back to that
idea, the origins of object
orientation that say that an
object isn't just a collection
of properties and associations. It
is a behavior and the
rich model of a real
world thing. And as you
say, a lot of people
sort of lost that in
the mid nineties and went
back to go to doing
dumb objects. And I think
that has quite profound consequences.
I mean, MVC, asp.net MVC,
the official line, as I
understand it is that the
model is where you put
the behavior. And yet, I
mean, I was talking with
Phil hack and Dave ever
about this recently in Redmond.
The fact is if you
look@manyasp.net MVC implementations, most of
the business logic has, is
in the controllers. And, and
a quite surprising amount is
leeched up into the views
themselves. And the problem with
that is cause it works,
but it becomes less maintainable
once you get some complexity
in the model. I think
one of the, one of
the frustrations we have is
that if I do a
little demo and I knock
up, you know, three, three
classes and so on and
so forth, I can make
it work and make it
work very quickly. But people
say, well, I don't see
the advantage, but where you
would really see the advantage
is if you are developing,
you know, 300, 500 classes
in your application, when the
that's, when you lose the
agility, when, when, if the
business logic starts leaching out
into other layers. So these,
these objects, there are, there
are pocos, they don't have
any dependencies on interfaces or
base classes of yours, Correct?
. So with the exception
of following a few conventions
for those additional methods, the
complimentary methods we call, call
them, there's nothing that ties
your, your domain model to
naked objects, which is quite
fortunate. I mean, when, when
we were trying to get
this idea off the ground
several years ago, obviously people
were very, very reluctant to
try something that new and
that radical, but the one
saving grace we could say
was, well, look, if you
develop your domain model using
naked objects, even if you
decide down the line that
you just can't cope with,
you know, the style of
user interface or, or, you
know, some other problem, you
could still take the domain
model and write a conventional
application, whether it was in
MVC or in, in WinForms
on top of it, you
wouldn't have done anything unusual
to the domain objects to
get there. Huh. Now what
about persistence? How do, what
is, what is naked object
say about getting these things
into, from an object model
into a relational database, We
rely a hundred percent on
entity framework. We, we did
some early experiments with hibernate
or other N hibernate. It
was at the time that
we were trying, and it
wasn't really rich enough. And
I think it's obviously moved
on a long way now
and naked objects could be
made to work with that.
But we decided to kind
of go with the, the
Microsoft flow and go with
entity framework. We were obviously
extremely disappointed when entity framework
one came out as a
lot of people were, but
entity framework four works really
well for us. And you
can use that model first
or database first or increasingly
code first. I mean, code
first is not officially released.
It's still experimental, but it
does work very, very well
with naked objects. It was
really interesting. So then what
are some of the objections?
I mean, I could see
someone saying that that we're,
we're going against separation of
concerns because so much emphasis
is being put on having
really smart models. Yes. I
hear that one quite often.
It's a little frustrating because
I think that naked objects
separates the concerns better than
anything else does. I mean,
there is no user interface
logic in the model and,
you know, whereas, whereas in,
in most other approaches, you
end up with business logic
leeching out into the other
layers. Whereas we say, actually
the you've got to keep
them separate because the, the
generic user interface doesn't know
anything about the model or
vice versa. So I don't
think that's really a valid
objection. Although people do seem
to imagine that what we're
doing is putting user interface
logic into the end of
the model. You know, the
most we're doing is adding
attributes and they're increasingly standard
system attributes. Anyway, the a
lot of people say, well,
I can see this would
work on the small scale,
you know, for a simple
demo, but I can't see
it working on it on
a large scale. And that
also is frustrating because really
the opposite is true. I
mean, we we've built systems
that involve hundreds of domain
classes and, and hundreds of
users. And actually the benefits
are much, much clearer on
a large and complex model
than they are on a
simple demo, which you could
have knocked up in Microsoft
access or what's it lightship
or, or one of those
technologies light switch, light switch.
Sorry. I think lightship is
actually a funnier, Funnier name.
We should change that. We
should start calling it visual
studio. Lightship Well, you haven't
got your unicorn edition of
code first Kind of the
framework magic unicorn edition. Well,
that's not any more controversial
than naked objects, frankly. Although
I have a theory about
why you called it unicorn
and the magic unicorn edition,
which is, I don't know
if you are a fan
of blade runner, but in
the, in the director's cut
of blade runner Ridley, Scott
supposedly got decades to dream
about a unicorn. And that
was meant to be a
hint that he was in
fact a replicant. Good, suspicious
about that one. Very, very,
very astute of you. Okay.
So we've got no cogeneration
and you can do more
than just crud. You've got
convention over configuration when it
comes to your unit, there's
conventionally named methods and properties.
There's attributes. What if I
want a UI? That's extremely
custom though. What if I
don't want a basic looking
application? I want something very
fancy. Well, there's nothing to
stop. You writing a completely
custom MVC application. You can
write as many custom views
and custom controllers as you
want. On top of the,
the domain objects in, in
using standard standard MVC patterns.
I mean, we provide a
whole lot of HTML helper
methods that help you make
the calls into the naked
objects model. But, but you
can do that. Obviously you're
going to lose the advantage,
but I mean, all applications
are going to involve some
amount of that. In fact,
I'd like to draw a
distinction that I think isn't
drawn nearly enough in, in
the software development world. You
know, the, the, the user
interface guru Allen Cooper, who
wrote the inmates are running
the asylum. He drew the
distinction between sovereign applications and
transient applications where sovereign applications
were, were largely internal applications
that users use all day,
every day and transient applications
are for example, public facing
applications. Now it seems to
me that most of the
focus in software development in
the last few years has
been on transient applications on
very high touch, very high
design, you know, designed to
be used by people. Who've
never seen it before, and
maybe never going to see
it again, all that kind
of stuff you see at
mix, for example, and it's
all great stuff. And, and
that is a requirement for
those sort of applications, but
that's not the way to
design sovereign applications. Not only
is it too expensive to
design sovereign applications that way,
but actually in a sovereign
application, you're necessarily got a
lot more complexity and you
want to be able to
give the user who, who
who's been through a learning
curve. They are an employee
of the company. Typically you
want to give them much
more control, you know, the
ability to do things in
an order that suits them,
not just to follow a
small set of scripts and,
and not much attention has
been paid to that and,
and naked objects. Although you
can use naked objects to
build public facing transit applications,
the benefits is less clear
there where it's really good
is in these internal data
intensive complex model type applications.
Have you found anything that
doesn't work that have you
found situations or models or
domains in which naked objects
falls down? It, it, as
I say, it's not so
good for a, a highly
scripted high touch multimedia style,
you know, silver light style,
public application it beyond that,
I would say, and it's
not good for, for unstructured
data. I mean, it is,
it is a relational database
kind of world that we
operate in that that's his
strong point. Hm. Why do
you think this is, might
be a difficult question, but
why do you think this
isn't more popular? Well, I
don't think it's the name.
I think the name or
to add to its popularity.
I, I think it's, it's
quite challenging. And you, you
alluded yourself earlier to the
fact that, you know, a
lot of people have either
ceased to put behavior on
objects or, or even consciously
believe that's, that's not a
good, good idea. I'm not
sure why. I think we
didn't help ourselves to some
extent with the earlier versions
of naked objects where the,
the resulting user interface was
not customizable now, as it
happens, our biggest customer, which
is the Irish government, that's
the version of naked objects
that they use. And they
don't, they they've said to
us that they don't want
to go into customizing the
UI. They've gained such huge
benefit. Ironically, from being able
to say to the users,
no, you can't customize the
UI. Now focus on what
it is that you want
focus on the domain model.
And what's interesting there is
that if you go and
talk to the users and
these are government clerical offices,
they all talk the same
language. The, the, you know,
Eric Evans in, in domain driven
design talked about the ubiquitous
language that you, you, you
needed a model that represented
the ubiquitous language of the
business. Well, that's what they've
got there. And the developers,
when the developers talk in
that particular case, in terms
of customer and payment and
scheme and case, and, and
officer that's what the user
sees on the screen, the
user talks about customers and
cases and, and schemes and
payments and offices. And so
the user can translate their
requirements very, very easily. The
user will say, look, I
want another action on the
customer object. So I can
say, show me the most
recent payments made to that
customer. And you now don't
have all this translation process
of what that means for
the developers. The developers understand
immediately. That means a new
action on that object, a
new method on that object.
So I asked a couple
of questions on Twitter about
this in preparation for the
interview. I can only assume
that you have Twitter searches
as well. So you may
have followed some of the
discussions that there was a
couple of interesting questions and
comments. And one of them
I thought was interesting from
Scott bellwether, who basically said
that exposing raw domain objects
out to kind of any,
any expert he said to
any external user agent is
kind of getting away with
something, your, your filling it
with abstractions that are giving
it hints on how to
use the, how to make
the UI. Is it really
a domain object or is
it a, is it really
some custom thing? I mean,
we realize that it's poco,
it's technically poco, but how
Well, you know, that that's
a valid question. I mentioned
the Irish government earlier, and
I can pick an example
there. The, the first big
application that we did for
them, there was something like
300 domain classes, 300, 300
naked object classes. If you
like in the model now
of those, I think the
business would immediately, if you
looked at the code, if
you actually went in and
looked@the.net classes, they actually wrote
it in phoebe.net, but it
could equally have been in
C sharp. If you look
to the dotnet classes and
you showed them to a
business user, the business user
would recognize more than 90%
of those. There are very
few objects that would do
it, that that are doing
something that the user doesn't
recognize. And secondly, more than
90% of those correspond directly
to persist it entities. So
there, I think there are,
there are a very small
number in the first system.
There were about three, three
domain objects that you might
call today, view models, meaning
they were constructions purely to
facilitate something on the user
interface. They weren't persisted, but
that's three out of 300
in that particular case. Okay.
So, so then from your
perspective, it is really about
modeling the business domain and
make an, and I think
that, that, that was a
very interesting, you said that
a huge number of those
objects were quickly recognizable, like
the language that they were
speaking wasn't MVC or.net. It
was the language of the
business. Absolutely. And, and, you
know, I'm a great believer
in, in domain driven design.
And, and, and when we
conduct the analysis sessions, and
obviously we, we, we prototype
rapidly and we show them
feedback, but you're all the
time you're listening out when
the users are talking, you're
listening for nouns that they're
using that aren't in the
model. So a good example
is in this Irish government
application, they, they pay pensions
in Ireland. A lot of
people are pick up their
pension at the local post
office through a payment book.
That's now gone electronic, but
it wasn't a payment book.
So obviously we had payment
book as an object and
that contained payments, but I,
when we were talking to
them, I heard them refer
a number of times to
the book renewal cycle, meaning
once a year, duller prints
all these books. And, and
we started asking the question,
well, they're using this noun
book, renewal cycle. Why isn't
that in there in the
object model? And as we
probed on that, we decided
it should be that there
is now a persisted object.
Each, each payment book is
associated with its book renewal
cycle. Who was your external
reviewer on your PhD thesis?
Well, it was actually the
Norwegian professor trig V cranes
calc, and he is not
terribly widely known except that
he was the inventor of
the MVC pattern back in
1978. And it wasn't my
decision that, you know, it's
never your decision who your
external examiner is. And when
it became known to me
that that's what was going
to be, I was a
little nervous because a lot
of people were saying, well,
this naked objects, pattern flies
in the face of, or
contradicts the MVC pattern, because
where are your views and
controllers? Now? I didn't feel
that was true. Our view
is that, I mean, naked
objects is MVC. It's just
that to begin with your
views and controllers are completely
generic. You're writing the models.
And I walked into my
Viber as they call it
here or defense as it
would be called in, in
the States when I finished
my thesis and there, he
was sitting there with the
other examiners and he said,
well, I'd like to put
you at ease, Richard, we're
awarding your you're a PhD
straight off without any further
questions, except for our own
interests. And what he, you
then went on to say
that it was really interesting.
He said, when I read
this, I realized that this
was our intent back in
the late seventies, when we
were working on MVC. The
intent was that when you
had a model, you ought
to get a generic view
and controller for free so
that you didn't have to
write anything. And you should
only then write views and
controllers as you need to
deviate from that generic presentation.
But he said, we never
did it. It was never
done back then. And so,
you know, here I was,
whatever that is 25 years
later actually doing it. Well,
I really appreciate you taking
the time to sit down
and explain this to us
and where can I must
be, want people going around
and Googling with being for
naked and objects. Where's the
best place for people to
learn about this pattern and
to start playing with it
themselves. Incidentally, if you do
Google or being for, for
naked, you'll be surprised that
the first 500 hits are
to do with us the
next 5 million and what you
might expect, but no, it
go to www.nakedobjects.net. And that's
where we describe it. Or
anyone can download the free
evaluation version of naked objects
MVC. Right now it's the
evaluation version is the whole
thing. You can develop a
complete application as an example
application with it. You just
can only run it locally.
If you want to deploy
it, you need a license
version, but there's also a
bunch of videos on that
site, like an object stop.
And that'll give you the
idea as well. Well, brilliant.
Well, thanks a lot. And
you've given us a lot
to think about, and we'll
all, we'll all go off
and do the reading and
decide for ourselves. Thank you,
Scott. Thank you, Richard Paulson.
And this has been another
episode of Hansel minutes, and
I'll see you again next
week.